FOSDEM 2012
===========

Last week I was in Belgium, attending the Free and Open Source Developers
European Meeting — FOSDEM, for short. This conference is held every year and
gathers people from all around the globe to discuss and publish FOSS-related
matters. Belgian beer, waffles, french fries, and sub-zero temperatures were
also in the agenda.

.. image:: http://i.imgur.com/ufLRC.jpg
    :alt: groupphoto
    :align: center

I talked briefly about testing in WebKit EFL, after the required tools have
been implemented last year, and how it affected the quality of the port.
Although I could broadcast what I was there for, the need to improve my
public-speaking skills (specially in a foreign language) surely exists; I
guess that the only way to improve this is practice. One could say I traveled
a long distance just to talk fifteen minutes about software testing, but such
places have a lot more to offer.

I’ve met a lot of people this time around (I’ve attended the same conference
last year as well): people from the WebKit project (from Qt and GTK+ ports
mostly — unfortunately meeting the Mac/Chromium guys in such events is a
little bit more complicated), the EFL project, and watched some lectures on
interesting subjects, such as domain-specific-languages&LLVM, text input in
mobile devices (and how difficult it is), multi-path TCP (very interesting,
by the way!), and even saw the Rasterman talking about EFL to a large
audience. Unfortunately, I wasn’t able to meet people I’d like to meet (the
CMake guys, which I talked briefly while working on the WebKit-EFL build
system), due to overlapping schedules. Oh, well.

Devices with Tizen were also there if you knew where to look and I was able
to play around with them. Despite it still being a little bit rough in the
edges (pun intended), I was very impressed by the overall smoothness. Granted
that the hardware isn’t too shabby, but it was as snappy as an user interface
should be. Can’t wait to get my hands on a Tizen device I can call my own.

I’ve also had the opportunity to drink more Club-Mate in the Brussels
Hackerspace (in a new place since last year). Unfortunately my hackerspace
passport arrived in the mail a couple days after I left for Europe, so I
couldn’t get it properly stamped.

All in all, it was a great experience. I sure hope I’ll be able to attend
this conference next year. And last, but certainly not least, I’d like to
thank my employer, ProFUSION Embedded Systems, for sponsoring my trip.


.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: profusion,enlightenment,conferences
.. comments::